# Tennis Match Prediction Project

## Introduction

With a rich history and a vast global outreach, Tennis is arguably the most popular sport in the world. Beyond its contributions to individual health and community engagement, tennis has become a powerful force when it comes to building international connections. Major tournaments, containing players from most of the major countries, attract tens of millions of viewers worldwide, creating a shared experience that transcends cultural and geographic boundaries. In this dynamic world of aces and volleys, tennis stands as a sport that reaches much further than meets the eye, influencing individuals and societies alike.

Our analysis focuses on individual tennis matches as we look to determine how to predict match outcomes and match durations. Through our initial studies, we found that a tennis match can be influenced by a wide variety of variables. As we dove into the relationships between these variables in our exploratory data analysis, we aimed to focus on questions that sought to discover how important match-specific statistics influence a tennis match. Through deep analysis and heavy discussion, we felt that these two questions would be interesting and important to explore further.

**Q1: Which match statistics are most useful in predicting the outcome of tennis matches in the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP)?**

**Q2: Which match statistics are most useful in predicting the duration of matches in the ATP?**

For our first question, we investigated how to predict the winner of tennis matches using match statistics from about 15,000 matches in the Association of Tennis Professionals (ATP). Being able to predict match outcomes can be very useful in sports betting. If you can accurately predict who will win a match, you can bet on the right athlete and win money! Statistical prediction may not always be 100 percent accurate, but it can give people a competitive edge when placing bets, by using real data and evidence, rather than randomly choosing who will win or choosing based on a personal hunch. Another benefit of predicting the winner of tennis matches is for tennis players & coaches themselves. Knowing which match statistics are most helpful in predicting a winner, can allow tennis players to focus their practice on particular areas, such as perfecting their serves to earn more aces during matches.

For our second question, we examined how to predict the match duration, in minutes, of each match in our dataset. Knowing match duration can be helpful to tennis players and coaches alike, as endurance is important when it comes to performing well throughout long matches. Predicting how long a match will last, can help tennis players adequately train and prepare to perform well on the big day. Another interesting use of predicting match duration could be to help schedule matches, especially those that air on television. Allotting enough air time for each match can ensure that viewers don’t miss a minute of entertainment. Lastly, predicting match duration can help predict how much money might be made from those attending matches in-person. Perhaps, the longer a match is, the more money will be spent by attendees on concessions and merchandise.

## Data

Our primary dataset is Jeff Sackmann’s comprehensive tennis ATP match dataset, which covers match data from 1920 to the present day. This dataset is free and publicly available on GitHub, which makes it an ideal resource for our analysis. The dataset is organized into yearly files with singular match data, providing an easy-to-navigate and clear structure. For our project, we decided to use the ATP match dataset from 2016 to 2019 and 2022. Due to the changing climate of the sport, we were interested in recent data. Furthermore, we left out 2020 and 2021 as further analysis of the data revealed an abundance of NA entries that we concluded to be a result of tournaments being canceled during the pandemic.

Since one of our focuses was always on the prediction of match results, we cleaned our dataset accordingly. The way certain variables were structured, in which the winner and loser were already denoted in the name of the variable, made it difficult for further analysis to be applied. The dataset also included many variables that we were not concerned with and were subsequently removed during cleaning, two examples were player country and player ID. The variables we kept were match statistics that we concluded, through analysis, would have the most influential impact on our questions.

The variables in our data are mostly match statistics for the two players that competed in each match. **player1_ace** and **player2_ace** display the number of aces each respective player earned during the match. **player1_df** and **player2_df** are the number of double faults, **player1_svpt** and **player2_svpt** are the number of serve points, **player1_1stIn** and **player2_1stIn** are the number of first serves made, **player1_1stWon** and **player2_1stWon** are the number of first-serve points won, **player1_2ndWon** and **player2_2ndWon** are the number of second-serve points won, **player1_SvGms** and **player2_SvGms** are the number of serve games, **player1_bpSaved** and **player2_bpSaved** are the number of break points saved, and **player1_bpFaced** and **player2_bpFaced** are the number of break points faced. **player1_won** is a binary variable that displays 1 when Player 1 won the match and 0 when Player 2 won the match. **minutes** displays the duration of each match in minutes.

To predict the match outcome with regression analysis for question 1, we needed to find a way to randomize the player number and mask the match result. We defined a custom function, shuffle_players, to anonymize the dataset by randomly assigning match statistics to two hypothetical players - Player 1 and Player 2 - in each match record. This approach ensured the blind analysis’ integrity by obfuscating the identities of the winners and losers. Applying this function to the dataset, we ensured that each match’s data was individually randomized along with a binary outcome variable indicating whether Player 1 won.

After data cleaning and transformation, we were left with 14,472 observations and 20 variables. The table below provides a glimpse of the first 5 rows of data.


